---
tags: [ref]
title: '1305.7513'
created: '2020-05-13T06:56:59.689Z'
modified: '2020-05-14T15:45:52.529Z'
---

# 1305.7513

## [From eV to EeV: Neutrino Cross-Sections Across Energy Scales](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1305.7513.pdf)

@article{Formaggio_2012,
   title={From eV to EeV: Neutrino cross sections across energy scales},
   volume={84},
   ISSN={1539-0756},
   url={http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/RevModPhys.84.1307},
   DOI={10.1103/revmodphys.84.1307},
   number={3},
   journal={Reviews of Modern Physics},
   publisher={American Physical Society (APS)},
   author={Formaggio, J. A. and Zeller, G. P.},
   year={2012},
   month={Sep},
   pages={1307–1341}
}

- Neutrino originally postulated by Wolfgang Pauli in 1930, and has played a prominent role in understanding of nuclear and particle physics.
- The revalation that neutrinos can no longer be massless is perhaps the first significant alteration to the standard model.
- A nice plot of neutrino energy regimes from Big Bang through accelerator to Extra-galactic vs their cross-sections. I could definitely use this and cite it to the paper 
- Contains a good description of fundamental electroweak scattering if we need a reference for that (page 4->)
- First anumu + e- => anumu + e- scattering made by CERN bubble cchamber experiment Gargamelle 
- This and DIS NC observations confirmed the weak neutral currents and helped solidify the standard model.
- Maybe include a bubble chamber image of the first candidate neutrino interaction.
- At intermediate energy scales (CHIPS range) interactions fall into three main catageories. Elastic and quasi-elastic scattering, resonance production and DIS.
- Include an actual data cross-section plot for both CC and NC showing contributions from different experiments
- Show the tau-neutrino cross section compared to the muon/electron in our energy range to show it doesn't matter. All the interactions and arguments that go along with them are the same for nuel/numu as with nutau, except for one key difference; the energy threshold. The nutau interaction CC cross section is severely altered because of the large tau lepton mass. Then show the plot.
- Bellow 2Gev it's mainly quasi-elastic with the neutrino scattering of the entire nucelon, rather than its consituent partons.
- Modern experiments MiniBooNE and NOMAD see higher absolute cross-sections than expected. It is currently believed that nucelear effects beyond the impulse approximation are desponsible for the discrepancy. Such as nucleon-nucleon correlations and two-body exchange currents must be included to get it righ. THIS IS MEC!
- NC QEL lots of people call NC Elastic Scattering, the ratio of NC Elastic/CC QE is ~0.11 from measurements by a few experiments.
- Single pion production is when the neutrino excites the struck nucleon producing a baryon resonance, which then quickly decays most often into a nucleon and a single pion final state. There are seven possible single pion channels, 3CC and 4NC, which we see from the GENIE events.
- Show all the interaction equations for these νμp→μ−pπ+ etc...
- NC pi-zero production is often the largest numu-induced backgrond in experiments searching for numu->nuel oscillations. And CC pi production can present a non-negligable complication in the determination of neutrino energy in experiments. Therefore measuring and modelling nuclear effects in pion production has become paramount.
- These resonances can also decay into photons with a small branchng fraction, yes, but, like NC pi-zero production they still pose a non-negliable source of background to the CHIPS main search.
- Neutrinos can also coherently produce single pion final state. In this case the neutrino coherently scatters from the entire nucleus transferring negligable energy to the target. Hence, you produce a ditinctly forward-scattered pion with no nuclear recoil. This process is relatively small however.
- The resonances can also decay to multi-pion final state, along with DIS this contributes a copious source of multi-pion final states. However, due to the inherant complexity of reconstructing multiple pion final states, not many experiments look at these cross-sections.
- You can also get kaon production but they have small cross-sections due to the kain mass and because kaon channels are not enhanced by any dominant resonance.
- You then get DIS where the neutrino scatters of a quark in the nucleon via the exchange of a virtual W or Z boson producing a lepton and a hadronic system in the final state.
- To isolate DOS events experiments typically apply kinematic cuts to remove QE scattering and resonance-mediated contributions from their data. 



